Annual Percentage Rate (APR): The cost of a loan or other financing as an annual rate. The APR includes the interest rate, points, broker fees and certain other credit charges a borrower is required to pay.
Annuity: An amount paid yearly or at other regular intervals, often at a guaranteed minimum amount. Also, a type of insurance policy in which the policy holder makes payments for a fixed period or until a stated
age, and then receives annuity payments from the insurance company. Application Fee: The fee that a mortgage
lender or broker charges to apply for a mortgage to cover processing costs. Appraisal: A professional analysis used
to estimate the value of the property. This
includes examples of sales of similar prop-
erties.
Appraiser: A professional who conducts an
analysis of the property, including examples
of sales of similar properties in order to de-
velop an estimate of the value of the prop-
erty. The analysis is called an “appraisal.”
Appreciation: An increase in the market
value of a home due to changing market
conditions and/or home improvements.
Arbitration: A process where disputes are
settled by referring them to a fair and neu-
tral third party (arbitrator). The disputing
 Glossary
parties agree in advance to agree with
the decision of the arbitrator. There is
a hearing where both parties have an
opportunity to be heard, after which the
arbitrator makes a decision.
Asbestos: A toxic material that was
once used in housing insulation and
fireproofing. Because some forms of as-
bestos have been linked to certain lung
diseases, it is no longer used in new
homes. However, some older homes may
still have asbestos in these materials.
Assessed Value: Typically the value
placed on property for the purpose of
taxation.
Assessor: A public official who estab-
lishes the value of a property for taxa-
tion purposes.
Asset: Anything of monetary value that
is owned by a person or company. As-
sets include real property, personal
property, stocks, mutual funds, etc.
Assignment of Mortgage: A document
evidencing the transfer of ownership of a
mortgage from one person to another.
Assumable Mortgage: A mortgage loan
that can be taken over (assumed) by the
buyer when a home is sold. An assump-
tion of a mortgage is a transaction in
which the buyer of real property takes
over the seller’s existing mortgage; the
seller remains liable unless released by
the lender from the obligation. If the
mortgage contains a due-on-sale clause,
the loan may not be assumed without
the lender’s consent.
Assumption: A homebuyer’s agreement
to take on the primary responsibility
for paying an existing mortgage from a
home seller.
Assumption Fee: A fee a lender charges
a buyer who will assume the seller’s ex-
isting mortgage.
Automated Underwriting: An auto-
mated process performed by a technol-
ogy application that streamlines the
processing of loan applications and
provides a recommendation to the lender
to approve the loan or refer it for manual
underwriting.
B
Balance Sheet: A financial statement
that shows assets, liabilities, and net
worth as of a specific date.
Balloon Mortgage: A mortgage with
monthly payments often based on a
30-year amortization schedule, with
the unpaid balance due in a lump sum
payment at the end of a specific period
of time (usually 5 or 7 years). The mort-
gage may contain an option to “reset”
the interest rate to the current market
rate and to extend the due date if certain
conditions are met.
Balloon Payment: A final lump sum
payment that is due, often at the matu-
rity date of a balloon mortgage.
Bankruptcy: Legally declared unable to
pay your debts. Bankruptcy can severely
impact your credit and your ability to
borrow money.
Before-tax Income: Income before taxes
are deducted. Also known as “gross in-
come.”
Biweekly Payment Mortgage: A mort-
gage with payments due every two weeks
(instead of monthly).
Bona fide: In good faith, without fraud.
Bridge Loan: A short-term loan secured
by the borrower’s current home (which
is usually for sale) that allows the pro-
ceeds to be used for building or closing
on a new house before the current home
is sold. Also known as a “swing loan.”
Glossary 
Broker: An individual or firm that acts
as an agent between providers and users
of products or services, such as a mort-
gage broker or real estate broker. See
also “Mortgage Broker.”
Building Code: Local regulations that
set forth the standards and require-
ments for the construction, maintenance
and occupancy of buildings. The codes
are designed to provide for the safety,
health and welfare of the public.
Buydown: An arrangement whereby
the property developer or another third
party provides an interest subsidy to
reduce the borrower’s monthly payments
typically in the early years of the loan.
Buydown Account: An account in
which funds are held so that they can be
applied as part of the monthly mortgage
payment as each payment comes due
during the period that an interest rate
buydown plan is in effect.
C
Cap: For an adjustable-rate mortgage
(ARM), a limitation on the amount the
interest rate or mortgage payments may
increase or decrease. See also “Lifetime
Payment Cap,” “Lifetime Rate Cap,” “Pe-
riodic Payment Cap,” and “Periodic Rate
Cap.”
Capacity: Your ability to make your
mortgage payments on time. This de-
pends on your income and income
stability (job history and security), your
assets and savings, and the amount of
your income each month that is left over
after you’ve paid for your housing costs,
debts and other obligations.
Cash-out Refinance: A refinance trans-
action in which the borrower receives
additional funds over and above the
amount needed to repay the existing
mortgage, closing costs, points, and any
subordinate liens.
Certificate of Deposit: A document is-
sued by a bank or other financial institu-
tion that is evidence of a deposit, with the
issuer’s promise to return the deposit plus
earnings at a specified interest rate within
a specified time period.
Certificate of Eligibility: A document is-
sued by the U.S. Department of Veterans
Affairs (VA) certifying a veteran’s eligibility
for a VA-guaranteed mortgage loan.
Chain of Title: The history of all of the
documents that have transferred title to
a parcel of real property, starting with the
earliest existing document and ending
with the most recent.
Change Orders: A change in the original
construction plans ordered by the prop-
erty owner or general contractor.
Clear Title: Ownership that is free of
liens, defects, or other legal encumbranc-
es.
Closing: The process of completing a
financial transaction. For mortgage
loans, the process of signing mortgage
documents, disbursing funds, and, if
applicable, transferring ownership of
the property. In some jurisdictions, clos-
ing is referred to as “escrow,” a process
by which a buyer and seller deliver legal
documents to a third party who completes
the transaction in accordance with their
instructions. See also “Settlement.”
Closing Agent: The person or entity that
coordinates the various closing activities,
including the preparation and recordation
of closing documents and the disburse-
ment of funds. (May be referred to as an
escrow agent or settlement agent in some
jurisdictions.) Typically, the closing is con-
ducted by title companies, escrow compa-
nies or attorneys.
Closing Costs: The upfront fees charged
in connection with a mortgage loan trans-
action. Money paid by a buyer (and/or
seller or other third party, if applicable)
 Glossary
to effect the closing of a mortgage loan,
generally including, but not limited to
a loan origination fee, title examination
and insurance, survey, attorney’s fee,
and prepaid items, such as escrow de-
posits for taxes and insurance.
Closing Date: The date on which the
sale of a property is to be finalized and a
loan transaction completed. Often, a real
estate sales professional coordinates the
setting of this date with the buyer, the
seller, the closing agent, and the lender.
Closing Statement: See “HUD-1 Settle-
ment Statement.”
Co-borrower: Any borrower other than
the first borrower whose name appears
on the application and mortgage note,
even when that person owns the prop-
erty jointly with the first borrower and
shares liability for the note.
Collateral: An asset that is pledged as
security for a loan. The borrower risks
losing the asset if the loan is not repaid
according to the terms of the loan agree-
ment. In the case of a mortgage, the
collateral would be the house and real
property.
Commission: The fee charged for ser-
vices performed, usually based on a
percentage of the price of the items sold
(such as the fee a real estate agent earns
on the sale of a house).
Commitment Letter: A binding of-
fer from your lender that includes the
amount of the mortgage, the interest
rate, and repayment terms.
Common Areas: Those portions of a
building, land, or improvements and
amenities owned by a planned unit
development (PUD) or condominium
project’s homeowners’ association (or
a cooperative project’s cooperative cor-
poration) that are used by all of the
unit owners, who share in the common
expenses of their operation and main-
tenance. Common areas include swim-
ming pools, tennis courts, and other
recreational facilities, as well as common
corridors of buildings, parking areas,
means of ingress and egress, etc.
Comparables: An abbreviation for “com-
parable properties,” which are used as a
comparison in determining the current
value of a property that is being ap-
praised.
Concession: Something given up or
agreed to in negotiating the sale of a
house. For example, the sellers may
agree to help pay for closing costs.
Condominium: A unit in a multiunit
building. The owner of a condominium
unit owns the unit itself and has the
right, along with other owners, to use
the common areas but does not own the
common elements such as the exterior
walls, floors and ceilings or the struc-
tural systems outside of the unit; these
are owned by the condominium associa-
tion. There are usually condominium as-
sociation fees for building maintenance,
property upkeep, taxes and insurance
on the common areas and reserves for
improvements.
Construction Loan: A loan for financ-
ing the cost of construction or improve-
ments to a property; the lender disburs-
es payments to the builder at periodic
intervals during construction.
Contingency: A condition that must be
met before a contract is legally binding.
For example, home purchasers often
include a home inspection contingency;
the sales contract is not binding unless
and until the purchaser has the home
inspected.
Conventional Mortgage: A mortgage
loan that is not insured or guaranteed
by the federal government or one of its
agencies, such as the Federal Housing
Administration (FHA), the U.S. Depart-
ment of Veterans Affairs (VA), or the
Rural Housing Service (RHS). Contrast
with “Government Mortgage.”
Conversion Option: A provision of some
adjustable-rate mortgage (ARM) loans
that allows the borrower to change the
ARM to a fixed-rate mortgage at speci-
fied times after loan origination.
Convertible ARM: An adjustable-rate
mortgage (ARM) that allows the borrower
to convert the loan to a fixed-rate mort-
gage under specified conditions.
Cooperative (Co-op) Project: A project
in which a corporation holds title to a
residential property and sells shares to
individual buyers, who then receive a
proprietary lease as their title.
Cost of Funds Index (COFI): An in-
dex that is used to determine interest
rate changes for certain adjustable-rate
mortgage (ARM) loans. It is based on the
weighted monthly average cost of de-
posits, advances, and other borrowings
of members of the Federal Home Loan
Bank of San Francisco.
Counter-offer: An offer made in re-
sponse to a previous offer. For example,
after the buyer presents their first offer,
the seller may make a counter-offer with
a slightly higher sale price.
Credit: The ability of a person to bor-
row money, or buy goods by paying
over time. Credit is extended based on a
lender’s opinion of the person’s financial
situation and reliability, among other
factors.
Credit Bureau: A company that gath-
ers information on consumers who use
credit. These companies sell that infor-
mation to lenders and other businesses
in the form of a credit report.
Credit History: Information in the files
of a credit bureau, primarily comprised
of a list of individual consumer debts
and a record of whether or not these
debts were paid back on time or “as
Glossary 
agreed.” Your credit history is called a
credit report when provided by a credit
bureau to a lender or other business.
Credit Life Insurance: A type of insur-
ance that pays off a specific amount of
debt or a specified credit account if the
borrower dies while the policy is in force.
Credit Report: Information provided by
a credit bureau that allows a lender or
other business to examine your use of
credit. It provides information on money
that you’ve borrowed from credit institu-
tions and your payment history.
Credit Score: A numerical value that
ranks a borrower’s credit risk at a given
point in time based on a statistical eval-
uation of information in the individual’s
credit history that has been proven to be
predictive of loan performance.
Creditor: A person who extends credit
to whom you owe money.
Creditworthy: Your ability to qualify for
credit and repay debts.
D
Debt: Money owed from one person or
institution to another person or institu-
tion.
Debt-to-Income Ratio: The percent-
age of gross monthly income that goes
toward paying for your monthly hous-
ing expense, alimony, child support, car
payments and other installment debts,
and payments on revolving or open-end-
ed accounts, such as credit cards.
Deed: The legal document transferring
ownership or title to a property
Deed-in-Lieu of Foreclosure: The
transfer of title from a borrower to the
lender to satisfy the mortgage debt and
avoid foreclosure. Also called a “volun-
tary conveyance.”
 Glossary
Deed of Trust: A legal document in
which the borrower transfers the title to
a third party (trustee) to hold as security
for the lender. When the loan is paid in
full, the trustee transfers title back to
the borrower. If the borrower defaults on
the loan the trustee will sell the property
and pay the lender the mortgage debt.
Default: Failure to fulfill a legal obliga-
tion. A default includes failure to pay on
a financial obligation, but also may be a
failure to perform some action or ser-
vice that is non-monetary. For example,
when leasing a car, the lessee is usually
required to properly maintain the car.
Delinquency: Failure to make a pay-
ment when it is due. The condition of a
loan when a scheduled payment has not
been received by the due date, but gen-
erally used to refer to a loan for which
payment is 30 or more days past due.
Depreciation: A decline in the value of
a house due to changing market condi-
tions or lack of upkeep on a home.
Discount Point: A fee paid by the bor-
rower at closing to reduce the interest
rate. A point equals one percent of the
loan amount.
Down Payment: A portion of the price
of a home, usually between 3-20%, not
borrowed and paid up-front in cash.
Some loans are offerend with zero down-
payment.
Due-on-Sale Clause: A provision in a
mortgage that allows the lender to de-
mand repayment in full of the outstand-
ing balance if the property securing the
mortgage is sold.
E
Earnest Money Deposit: The deposit to
show that you’re committed to buying
the home. The deposit usually will not
be refunded to you after the seller ac-
cepts your offer, unless one of the sales
contract contingencies is not fulfilled.
Easement: A right to the use of, or ac-
cess to, land owned by another.
Employer-Assisted Housing: A program
in which companies assist their employ-
ees in purchasing homes by providing
assistance with the down payment, clos-
ing costs, or monthly payments.
Encroachment: The intrusion onto
another’s property without right or per-
mission.
Encumbrance: Any claim on a property,
such as a lien, mortgage or easement.
Equal Credit Opportunity Act (ECOA):
A federal law that requires lenders to
make credit equally available without
regard to the applicant’s race, color, reli-
gion, national origin, age, sex, or marital
status; the fact that all or part of the ap-
plicant’s income is derived from a public
assistance program; or the fact that the
applicant has in good faith exercised any
right under the Consumer Credit Protec-
tion Act. It also requires various notices
to consumers.
Equity: The value in your home above
the total amount of the liens against
your home. If you owe $100,000 on your
house but it is worth $130,000, you
have $30,000 of equity.
Escrow: An item of value, money, or
documents deposited with a third party
to be delivered upon the fulfillment of
a condition. For example, the deposit
by a borrower with the lender of funds
to pay taxes and insurance premiums
when they become due, or the deposit of
funds or documents with an attorney or
escrow agent to be disbursed upon the
closing of a sale of real estate.
Escrow Account: An account that a
mortgage servicer establishes on behalf
of a borrower to pay taxes, insurance
premiums, or other charges when they
are due. Sometimes referred to as an
“impound” or “reserve” account.
Escrow Analysis: The accounting that
a mortgage servicer performs to deter-
mine the appropriate balances for the
escrow account, compute the borrower’s
monthly escrow payments, and deter-
mine whether any shortages, surpluses
or deficiencies exist in the account.
Eviction: The legal act of removing
someone from real property.
Exclusive Right-to-Sell Listing: The
traditional kind of listing agreement un-
der which the property owner appoints
a real estate broker (known as the list-
ing broker) as exclusive agent to sell the
property on the owner’s stated terms,
and agrees to pay the listing broker a
commission when the property is sold,
regardless of whether the buyer is found
by the broker, the owner or another
broker. This is the kind of listing agree-
ment that is commonly used by a list-
ing broker to provide the traditional full
range of real estate brokerage services.
If a second real estate broker (known as
a selling broker) finds the buyer for the
property, then some commission will be
paid to the selling broker.
Exclusive Agency Listing: A listing
agreement under which a real estate
broker (known as the listing broker) acts
as an exclusive agent to sell the prop-
erty for the property owner, but may be
paid a reduced or no commission when
the property is sold if, for example, the
property owner rather than the listing
broker finds the buyer. This kind of list-
ing agreement can be used to provide
the owner a limited range of real estate
brokerage services rather than the tra-
ditional full range. As with other kinds
of listing agreements, if a second real
estate broker (known as a selling broker)
finds the buyer for the property, then
some commission will be paid to the
selling broker.
Glossary 
Executor: A person named in a will and
approved by a probate court to adminis-
ter the deposition of an estate in accor-
dance with the instructions of the will.
F
Fair Credit Reporting Act (FCRA): A
consumer protection law that imposes
obligations on (1) credit bureaus (and
similar agencies) that maintain consum-
er credit histories, (2) lenders and other
businesses that buy reports from credit
bureaus, and (3) parties who furnish
consumer information to credit bureaus.
Among other provisions, the FCRA limits
the sale of credit reports by credit bu-
reaus by requiring the purchaser to have
a legitimate business need for the data,
allows consumers to learn the informa-
tion on them in credit bureau files (in-
cluding one annual free credit report),
and specifies procedure for challenging
errors in that data.
Fair Market Value: The price at which
property would be transferred between
a willing buyer and willing seller, each
of whom has a reasonable knowledge of
all pertinent facts and is not under any
compulsion to buy or sell.
Fannie Mae: A New York stock ex-
change company. It is a public company
that operates under a federal charter
and is the nation’s largest source of
financing for home mortgages. Fannie
Mae does not lend money directly to
consumers, but instead works to en-
sure that mortgage funds are available
and affordable, by purchasing mortgage
loans from institutions that lend directly
to consumers.
Fannie Mae-Seller/Servicer: A lender
that Fannie Mae has approved to sell
loans to it and to service loans on Fan-
nie Mae’s behalf.
Fannie Mae/Freddie Mac Loan Limit:
The current 2006 Fannie Mae/Freddie
 Glossary
Mac loan limit for a single-family home
is $417,000 and is higher in Alaska,
Guam, Hawaii, and the U.S. Virgin
Islands. The Fannie Mae loan limit is
$533,850 for a two-unit home; $645,300
for a three-unit home; and $801,950 for
a four-unit home. Also referred to as the
“conventional loan limit.”
Federal Housing Administration
(FHA): An agency within the U.S. De-
partment of Housing and Urban Devel-
opment (HUD) that insures mortgages
and loans made by private lenders.
FHA-Insured Loan: A loan that is in-
sured by the Federal Housing Adminis-
tration (FHA) of the U.S. Department of
Housing and Urban Development (HUD).
First Mortgage: A mortgage that is the
primary lien against a property.
First-Time Home Buyer: A person with
no ownership interest in a principal
residence during the three-year period
preceding the purchase of the security
property.
Fixed-Period Adjustable-Rate Mort-
gage: An adjustable-rate mortgage (ARM)
that offers a fixed rate for an initial
period, typically three to ten years, and
then adjusts every six months, annually,
or at another specified period, for the
remainder of the term. Also known as a
“hybrid loan.”
Fixed-Rate Mortgage: A mortgage with
an interest rate that does not change
during the entire term of the loan.
Flood Certification Fee: A fee charged
by independent mapping firms to identi-
fy properties located in areas designated
as flood zones.
Flood Insurance: Insurance that com-
pensates for physical property damage
resulting from flooding. It is required for
properties located in federally designated
flood hazard zones.
Foreclosure: A legal action that ends
all ownership rights in a home when the
homebuyer fails to make the mortgage
payments or is otherwise in default un-
der the terms of the mortgage.
Forfeiture: The loss of money, property,
rights, or privileges due to a breach of a
legal obligation.
Fully Amortized Mortgage: A mortgage
in which the monthly payments are de-
signed to retire the obligation at the end
of the mortgage term.
G
General Contractor: A person who
oversees a home improvement or con-
struction project and handles various
aspects such as scheduling workers and
ordering supplies.
Gift Letter: A letter that a family mem-
ber writes verifying that s/he has given
you a certain amount of money as a gift
and that you don’t have to repay it. You
can use this money towards a portion
of your down payment with some mort-
gages.
Good-Faith Estimate: A form required
by the Real Estate Settlement Proce-
dures Act (RESPA) that discloses an esti-
mate of the amount or range of charges,
for specific settlement services the bor-
rower is likely to incur in connection
with the mortgage transaction.
Government Mortgage: A mortgage
loan that is insured or guaranteed by a
federal government entity such as the
Federal Housing Administration (FHA),
the U.S. Department of Veterans
Affairs (VA), or the Rural Housing
Service (RHS).
Government National Mortgage
Association (Ginnie Mae): A govern-
ment-owned corporation within the U.S.
Department of Housing and Urban De-
Glossary 
velopment (HUD) that guarantees se-
curities backed by mortgages that are
insured or guaranteed by other gov-
ernment agencies. Popularly known as
“Ginnie Mae.”
Gross Monthly Income: The income
you earn in a month before taxes and
other deductions. It also may include
rental income, self-employed income,
income from alimony, child support,
public assistance payments, and re-
tirement benefits.
Ground Rent: Payment for the use of
land when title to a property is held as
a leasehold estate (that is, the borrow-
er does not actually own the property,
but has a long-term lease on it).
Growing-Equity Mortgage (GEM):
A fixed-rate mortgage in which the
monthly payments increase according
to an agreed-upon schedule, with the
extra funds applied to reduce the loan
balance and loan term.
H
Hazard Insurance: Insurance cover-
age that compensates for physical
damage to a property from fire, wind,
vandalism, or other covered hazards
or natural disasters.
Home Equity Conversion Mortgage
(HECM): A special type of mortgage
developed and insured by the Federal
Housing Administration (FHA) that
enables older home owners to convert
the equity they have in their homes
into cash, using a variety of payment
options to address their specific finan-
cial needs. Sometimes called a “re-
verse mortgage.”
Home Equity Line of Credit
(HELOC): A type of revolving loan,
that enables a home owner to obtain
multiple advances of the loan pro-
ceeds at his or her own discretion, up
to an amount that represents a specified
percentage of the borrower’s equity in
the property.
Home Inspection: A professional in-
spection of a home to determine the
condition of the property. The inspec-
tion should include an evaluation of the
plumbing, heating and cooling systems,
roof, wiring, foundation and pest infesta-
tion.
Homeowner’s Insurance: A policy that
protects you and the lender from fire or
flood, which damages the structure of
the house; a liability, such as an injury
to a visitor to your home; or damage to
your personal property, such as your
furniture, clothes or appliances
Homeowner’s Warranty (HOW): In-
surance offered by a seller that covers
certain home repairs and fixtures for a
specified period of time.
Homeowners’ Association: An organi-
zation of homeowners residing within a
particular area whose principal purpose
is to ensure the provision and main-
tenance of community facilities and
services for the common benefit of the
residents.
Housing Expense Ratio: The percent-
age of your gross monthly income that
goes toward paying for your housing
expenses.
HUD-1 Settlement Statement: A final
listing of the closing costs of the mort-
gage transaction. It provides the sales
price and down payment, as well as the
total settlement costs required from the
buyer and seller.
Hybrid Loan: An adjustable-rate mort-
gage (ARM) that offers a fixed rate for
an initial period, typically three to
ten years, and then adjusts every six
months, annually, or at another speci-
fied period, for the remainder of the
term.
10 Glossary
I
Income Property: Real estate developed
or purchased to produce income, such
as a rental unit.
Index: A number used to compute
the interest rate for an adjustable-rate
mortgage (ARM). The index is generally
a published number or percentage, such
as the average interest rate or yield on
U.S. Treasury bills. A margin is added to
the index to determine the interest rate
that will be charged on the ARM. This
interest rate is subject to any caps on
the maximum or minimum interest rate
that may be charged on the mortgage,
stated in the note.
Individual Retirement Account (IRA):
A tax-deferred plan that can help you
build a retirement nest egg.
Inflation: An increase in prices.
Initial Interest Rate: The original inter-
est rate for an adjustable-rate mortgage
(ARM). Sometimes known as the “start
rate.”
Inquiry: A request for a copy of your
credit report by a lender or other busi-
ness, often when you fill out a credit
application and/or request more credit.
Too many inquiries on a credit report
can hurt your credit score; however,
most credit scores are not affected by
multiple inquiries from auto or mortgage
lenders within a short period of time.
Installment: The regular periodic pay-
ment that a borrower agrees to make to
a lender.
Installment Debt: A loan that is repaid
in accordance with a schedule of pay-
ments for a specified term (such as an
automobile loan).
Interest: The cost you pay to borrow money. It is the payment you make to a lender for the money it has loaned to you. Interest is usually expressed as a
percentage of the amount borrowed.
Interest Accrual Rate: The percentage
rate at which interest accumulates or
increases on a mortgage loan.
Interest Rate Cap: For an adjustable-
rate mortgage (ARM), a limitation on the
amount the interest rate can change per
adjustment or over the lifetime of the
loan, as stated in the note.
Interest Rate Ceiling: For an adjust-
able-rate mortgage (ARM), the maximum
interest rate, as specified in the mort-
gage note.
Interest Rate Floor: For an adjustable-
rate mortgage (ARM), the minimum in-
terest rate, as specified in the mortgage
note.
Investment Property: A property pur-
chased to generate rental income, tax
benefits, or profitable resale rather than
to serve as the borrower’s primary resi-
dence. Contrast with “second home.”
J
Judgment Lien: A lien on the property
of a debtor resulting from the decree of a
court.
Jumbo Loan: A loan that exceeds the
mortgage amount eligible for purchase
by Fannie Mae or Freddie Mac. Also
called “non-conforming loan.”
Junior Mortgage: A loan that is subor-
dinate to the primary loan or first-lien
mortgage loan, such as a second or third
mortgage.
K
Keogh Funds: A tax-deferred retire-
ment-savings plan for small business
owners or self-employed individuals who
Glossary 11
have earned income from their trade or
business. Contributions to the Keogh
plan are tax-deductible.
L
Late Charge: A penalty imposed by the
lender when a borrower fails to make a
scheduled payment on time.
Lease-Purchase Option: An option
sometimes used by sellers to rent a
property to a consumer, who has the op-
tion to buy the home within a specified
period of time. Typically, part of each
rental payment is put aside for the pur-
pose of accumulating funds to pay the
down payment and closing costs.
Liabilities: A person’s debts and other
financial obligations.
Liability Insurance: Insurance coverage
that protects property owners against
claims of negligence, personal injury or
property damage to another party.
LIBOR-Index: An index used to deter-
mine interest rate changes for certain
adjustable-rate mortgage (ARM) plans,
based on the average interest rate at
which international banks lend to or
borrow funds from the London Inter-
bank Market.
Lien: A claim or charge on property for
payment of a debt. With a mortgage,
the lender has the right to take the title
to your property if you don’t make the
mortgage payments.
Lifetime Cap: For an adjustable-rate
mortgage (ARM), a limit on the amount
that the interest rate or monthly pay-
ment can increase or decrease over the
life of the loan.
Liquid Asset: A cash asset or an asset
that is easily converted into cash.
Loan Origination: The process by which
a loan is made, which may include tak-
ing a loan application, processing and
underwriting the application, and clos-
ing the loan.
Loan Origination Fees: Fees paid to
your mortgage lender or broker for pro-
cessing the mortgage application. This
fee is usually in the form of points. One
point equals one percent of the mortgage
amount.
Loan-To-Value (LTV) Ratio: The re-
lationship between the loan amount
and the value of the property (the lower
of appraised value or sales price), ex-
pressed as a percentage of the property’s
value. For example, a $100,000 home
with an $80,000 mortgage has an LTV of
80 percent.
Lock-In Rate: A written agreement
guaranteeing a specific mortgage inter-
est rate for a certain amount of time.
Low-Down-Payment Feature: A feature
of some mortgages, usually fixed-rate
mortgages, that helps you buy a home
with a low down payment.
M
Manufactured Housing: Homes that
are built entirely in a factory in accor-
dance with a federal building code ad-
ministered by the U.S. Department of
Housing and Urban Development (HUD).
Manufactured homes may be single-
or multi-section and are transported
from the factory to a site and installed.
Homes that are permanently affixed to
a foundation often may be classified as
real property under applicable state law,
and may be financed with a mortgage.
Homes that are not permanently affixed
to a foundation generally are classified
as personal property, and are financed
with a retail installment sales agree-
ment.
1 Glossary
Margin: A percentage added to the index
for an adjustable-rate mortgage (ARM) to
establish the interest rate on each ad-
justment date.
Market Value: The current value of your
home based on what a purchaser would
pay. An appraisal is sometimes used to
determine market value.
Maturity Date: The date on which a
mortgage loan is scheduled to be paid in
full, as stated in the note.
Merged Credit Report: A credit report
issued by a credit reporting company
that combines information from two or
three major credit bureaus.
Modification: Any change to the terms
of a mortgage loan, including changes to
the interest rate, loan balance, or loan
term.
Money Market Account: A type of in-
vestment in which funds are invested in
short-term securities.
Mortgage: A loan using your home as
collateral. In some states the term mort-
gage is also used to describe the docu-
ment you sign (to grant the lender a lien
on your home). It also may be used to
indicate the amount of money you bor-
row, with interest, to purchase your
house. The amount of your mortgage
often is the purchase price of the home
minus your down payment.
Mortgage Broker: An individual or firm
that brings borrowers and lenders to-
gether for the purpose of loan origina-
tion. A mortgage broker typically takes
loan applications and may process
loans. A mortgage broker also may close
the loan.
Mortgage Insurance (MI): Insurance
that protects lenders against losses
caused by a borrower’s default on a
mortgage loan. MI typically is required
if the borrower’s down payment is less
than 20 percent of the purchase price.
Mortgage Insurance Premium (MIP):
The amount paid by a borrower for
mortgage insurance, either to a govern-
ment agency such as the Federal Hous-
ing Administration (FHA) or to a private
mortgage insurance (PMI) company.
Mortgage Lender: The lender providing
funds for a mortgage. Lenders also man-
age the credit and financial information
review, the property and the loan appli-
cation process through closing.
Mortgage Life Insurance: A type of
insurance that will pay off a mortgage if
the borrower dies while the loan is out-
standing; a form of credit life insurance.
Mortgage Rate: The interest rate you
pay to borrow the money to buy your
house.
Mortgagee: The institution or individual
to whom a mortgage is given.
Mortgagor: The owner of real estate who
pledges property as security for the re-
payment of a debt; the borrower.
Multifamily Mortgage: A mortgage loan
on a building with five or more dwelling
units.
Multifamily Properties: Typically,
buildings with five or more dwelling
units.
Multiple Listing Service (MLS): A
clearinghouse through which member
real estate brokerage firms regularly and
systematically exchange information
on listings of real estate properties and
share commissions with members who
locate purchasers. The MLS for an area
is usually operated by the local, private
real estate association as a joint venture
among its members designed to foster
real estate brokerage services.
Mutual Funds: A fund that pools the
money of its investors to buy a variety of
securities.
N
Negative Amortization: An increase in
the balance of a loan caused by adding
unpaid interest to the loan balance; this
occurs when the payment does not cover
the interest due.
Net Monthly Income: Your take-home
pay after taxes. It is the amount of
money that you actually receive in your
paycheck.
Net Worth: The value of a company or
individual’s assets, including cash, less
total liabilities.
Non-Liquid Asset: An asset that cannot
easily be converted into cash.
Note: A written promise to pay a speci-
fied amount under the agreed upon
conditions.
Note Rate: The interest rate stated on a
mortgage note, or other loan agreement.
O
Offer: A formal bid from the home buyer
to the home seller to purchase a home.
Open House: When the seller’s real
estate agent opens the seller’s house to
the public. You don’t need a real estate
agent to attend an open house.
Original Principal Balance: The total
amount of principal owed on a mortgage
before any payments are made.
Origination Fee: A fee paid to a lender
or broker to cover the administrative
costs of processing a loan application.
The origination fee typically is stated in
the form of points. One point is one per-
cent of the mortgage amount.
Owner Financing: A transaction in
which the property seller provides all or
Glossary 1
part of the financing for the buyer’s pur-
chase of the property.
Owner-Occupied Property: A property
that serves as the borrower’s primary
residence.
P
Partial Payment: A payment that is less
than the scheduled monthly payment on
a mortgage loan.
Payment Change Date: The date on
which a new monthly payment amount
takes effect, for example, on an adjust-
able-rate mortgage (ARM) loan.
Payment Cap: For an adjustable-rate
mortgage (ARM) or other variable rate
loan, a limit on the amount that pay-
ments can increase or decrease during
any one adjustment period.
Personal Property: Any property that is
not real property.
PITI: An acronym for the four primary
components of a monthly mortgage
payment: principle, interest, taxes, and
insurance (PITI).
PITI Reserves: A cash amount that a
borrower has available after making a
down payment and paying closing costs
for the purchase of a home. The princi-
pal, interest, taxes, and insurance (PITI)
reserves must equal the amount that the
borrower would have to pay for PITI for a
predefined number of months.
Planned Unit Development (PUD): A
real estate project in which individuals
hold title to a residential lot and home
while the common facilities are owned
and maintained by a homeowners’ as-
sociation for the benefit and use of the
individual PUD unit owners.
Point: One percent of the amount of the
mortgage loan. For example, if a loan
1 Glossary
is made for $50,000, one point equals
$500.
Power of Attorney: A legal document
that authorizes another person to act
on one’s behalf. A power of attorney can
grant complete authority or can be lim-
ited to certain acts and/or certain peri-
ods of time.
Pre-Approval: A process by which a
lender provides a prospective borrower
with an indication of how much money
he or she will be eligible to borrow when
applying for a mortgage loan. This pro-
cess typically includes a review of the
applicant’s credit history and may in-
volve the review and verification of in-
come and assets to close.
Pre-Approval Letter: A letter from a
mortgage lender indicating that you
qualify for a mortgage of a specific
amount. It also shows a home seller that
you’re a serious buyer.
Pre-Qualification: A preliminary assess-
ment by a lender of the amount it will
lend to a potential home buyer. The pro-
cess of determining how much money a
prospective home buyer may be eligible
to borrow before he or she applies for a
loan.
Pre-Qualification Letter: A letter from
a mortgage lender that states that you’re
pre-qualified to buy a home, but does
not commit the lender to a particular
mortgage amount.
Predatory Lending: Abusive lending
practices that include making mort-
gage loans to people who do not have
the income to repay them or repeatedly
refinancing loans, charging high points
and fees each time and “packing” credit
insurance onto a loan.
Prepayment: Any amount paid to re-
duce the principal balance of a loan
before the scheduled due date.
Prepayment Penalty: A fee that a bor-
rower may be required to pay to the
lender, in the early years of a mortgage
loan, for repaying the loan in full or pre-
paying a substantial amount to reduce
the unpaid principle balance.
Principal: The amount of money bor-
rowed or the amount of the loan that
has not yet been repaid to the lender.
This does not include the interest you
will pay to borrow that money. The
principal balance (sometimes called the
outstanding or unpaid principal balance)
is the amount owed on the loan minus
the amount you’ve repaid.
Private Mortgage Insurance: Insur-
ance for conventional mortgage loans
that protects the lender from loss in the
event of default by the borrower. See
Mortgage Insurance
Promissory Note: A written promise to
repay a specified amount over a speci-
fied period of time.
Property Appreciation: See “Apprecia-
tion.”
Purchase and Sale Agreement: A docu-
ment that details the price and condi-
tions for a transaction. In connection
with the sale of a residential property,
the agreement typically would include:
information about the property to be
sold, sale price, down payment, earnest
money deposit, financing, closing date,
occupancy date, length of time the offer
is valid, and any special contingencies.
Purchase Money Mortgage: A mortgage
loan that enables a borrower to acquire
a property.
Q
Qualifying Guidelines: Criteria used to
determine eligibility for a loan.
Glossary 1
Qualifying Ratios: Calculations that are
used in determining the loan amount
that a borrower qualifies for, typically
a comparison of the borrower’s total
monthly income to monthly debt pay-
ments and other recurring monthly
obligations.
Quality Control: A system of safeguards
to ensure that loans are originated, un-
derwritten and serviced according to the
lender’s standards and, if applicable, the
standards of the investor, governmental
agency, or mortgage insurer.
R
Radon: A toxic gas found in the soil
beneath a house that can contribute to
cancer and other illnesses.
Rate Cap: The limit on the amount an
interest rate on an adjustable-rate mort-
gage (ARM) can increase or decrease
during an adjustment period.
Rate Lock: An agreement in which an
interest rate is “locked in” or guaranteed
for a specified period of time prior to
closing. See also “Lock-in Rate.”
Ratified Sales Contract: A contract
that shows both you and the seller of
the house have agreed to your offer. This
offer may include sales contingencies,
such as obtaining a mortgage of a cer-
tain type and rate, getting an acceptable
inspection, making repairs, closing by a
certain date, etc.
Real Estate Professional: An individual
who provides services in buying and
selling homes. The real estate profes-
sional is paid a percentage of the home
sale price by the seller. Unless you’ve
specifically contracted with a buyer’s
agent, the real estate professional rep-
resents the interest of the seller. Real
estate professionals may be able to refer
you to local lenders or mortgage brokers,
but are generally not involved in the
lending process.
Real Estate Settlement Procedures
Act (RESPA): A federal law that requires
lenders to provide home mortgage bor-
rowers with information about transac-
tion-related costs prior to settlement, as
well as information during the life of the
loan regarding servicing and escrow ac-
counts. RESPA also prohibits kickbacks
and unearned fees in the mortgage loan
business.
Real Property: Land and anything
permanently affixed thereto — including
buildings, fences, trees, and minerals.
Recorder: The public official who keeps
records of transactions that affect real
property in the area. Sometimes known
as a “Registrar of Deeds” or “County
Clerk.”
Recording: The filing of a lien or other
legal documents in the appropriate pub-
lic record.
Refinance: Getting a new mortgage with
all or some portion of the proceeds used
to pay off the prior mortgage.
Rehabilitation Mortgage: A mortgage
loan made to cover the costs of repair-
ing, improving, and sometimes acquiring
an existing property.
Remaining Term: The original number
of payments due on the loan minus the
number of payments that have been
made.
Repayment Plan: An arrangement by
which a borrower agrees to make ad-
ditional payments to pay down past due
amounts while still making regularly
scheduled payments.
Replacement Cost: The cost to replace
damaged personal property without a
deduction for depreciation.
1 Glossary
Rescission: The cancellation or annul-
ment of a transaction or contract by
operation of law or by mutual consent.
Borrowers have a right to cancel certain
mortgage refinance and home equity
transactions within three business days
after closing, or for up to three years in
certain instances.
Revolving Debt: Credit that is extended
by a creditor under a plan in which
(1) the creditor contemplates repeated
transactions; (2) the creditor may im-
pose a finance charge from time to time
on an outstanding unpaid balance; and
(3) the amount of credit that may be ex-
tended to the consumer during the term
of the plan is generally made available to
the extent that any outstanding balance
is repaid.
Right of First Refusal: A provision in
an agreement that requires the owner
of a property to give another party the
first opportunity to purchase or lease
the property before he or she offers it for
sale or lease to others.
Rural Housing Service (RHS): An
agency within the U.S. Department of
Agriculture (USDA), which operates a
range of programs to help rural commu-
nities and individuals by providing loan
and grants for housing and community
facilities. The agency also works with
private lenders to guarantee loans for
the purchase or construction of single-
family housing.
S
Securities: A financial form that shows
the holder owns a share or shares of a
company (stock) or has loaned money to
a company or government organization
(bond).
Sale-Leaseback: A transaction in which
the buyer leases the property back to
the seller for a specified period of time.
Second Mortgage: A mortgage that has
a lien position subordinate to the first
mortgage.
Secondary Mortgage Market: The mar-
ket in which mortgage loan and mort-
gage-backed securities are bought and
sold.
Secured Loan: A loan that is backed by
property such as a house, car, jewelry,
etc.
Security: The property that will be given
or pledged as collateral for a loan.
Securities: Financial forms that shows
the holder owns a share or shares of a
company (stocks) or has loaned money
to a company or government organiza-
tion (bonds).
Seller Take-Back: An agreement in
which the seller of a property provides
financing to the buyer for the home pur-
chase. See also “Owner Financing.”
Servicer: A firm that performs servicing
functions, including collecting mortgage
payments, paying the borrower’s taxes
and insurance and generally managing
borrower escrow accounts.
Servicing: The tasks a lender performs
to protect the mortgage investment,
including the collection of mortgage
payments, escrow administration, and
delinquency management.
Settlement: The process of complet-
ing a loan transaction at which time the
mortgage documents are signed and
then recorded, funds are disbursed, and
the property is transferred to the buyer
(if applicable). Also called closing or es-
crow in different jurisdictions. See also
“Closing”
Settlement Statement: A document
that lists all closing costs on a consumer
mortgage transaction.
Single-Family Properties: One- to
four-unit properties including detached
homes, townhouses, condominiums, and
cooperatives, and manufactured homes
attached to a permanent foundation and
classified as real property under appli-
cable state law.
Soft Second Loan: A second mortgage
whose payment is forgiven or is deferred
until resale of the property.
Servicemembers Civil Relief Act: A
federal law that restricts the enforce-
ment of civilian debts against certain
military personnel who may not be able
to pay because of active military service.
It also provides other protections to cer-
tain military personel.
Subordinate Financing: Any mortgage
or other lien with lower priority than the
first mortgage.
Survey: A precise measurement of a
property by a licensed surveyor, show-
ing legal boundaries of a property and
the dimensions and location of improve-
ments.
Sweat Equity: A borrower’s contribution
to the down payment for the purchase of
a property in the form of labor or ser-
vices rather than cash.
T
Taxes and Insurance: Funds collected
as part of the borrower’s monthly pay-
ment and held in escrow for the pay-
ment of the borrower’s, or funds paid by
the borrower for, state and local prop-
erty taxes and insurance premiums.
Termite Inspection: An inspection to
determine whether a property has ter-
mite infestation or termite damage. In
many parts of the country, a home must
be inspected for termites before it can be
sold.
Glossary 1
Third-Party Origination: A process by
which a lender uses another party to
completely or partially originate, pro-
cess, underwrite, close, fund, or pack-
age a mortgage loan. See also “Mortgage
Broker.”
Title: The right to, and the ownership
of, property. A title or deed is sometimes
used as proof of ownership of land.
Title Insurance: Insurance that pro-
tects lenders and homeowners against
legal problems with the title.
Title Search: A check of the public re-
cords to ensure that the seller is the le-
gal owner of the property and to identify
any liens or claims against the property.
Trade Equity: Real estate or assets
given to the seller as part of the down
payment for the property.
Transfer Tax: State or local tax payable
when title to property passes from one
owner to another.
Treasury Index: An index that is used
to determine interest rate changes for
certain adjustable-rate mortgage (ARM)
plans. It is based on the results of auc-
tions by the U.S. Treasury of Treasury
bills and securities.
Truth-In-Lending Act (TILA): A fed-
eral law that requires disclosure of a
truth-in-lending statement for consumer
credit. The statement includes a sum-
mary of the total cost of credit, such as
the annual percentage rate (APR) and
other specifics of the credit.
Two- to Four- Family Property: A
residential property that provides liv-
ing space (dwelling units) for two to
four families, although ownership of the
structure is evidenced by a single deed;
a loan secured by such a property is
considered to be a single-family mort-
gage.
1 Glossary
U
Underwriting: The process used to de-
termine loan approval. It involves evalu-
ating the property and the borrower’s
credit and ability to pay the mortgage.
Uniform Residential Loan Applica-
tion: A standard mortgage application
you will have to complete. The form
requests your income, assets, liabilities,
and a description of the property you
plan to buy, among other things.
Unsecured Loan: A loan that is not
backed by collateral.
V
Veterans Affairs (U.S. Department
of Veterans Affairs): A federal govern-
ment agency that provides benefits to
veterans and their dependents, includ-
ing health care, educational assistance,
financial assistance, and guaranteed
home loans.
VA Guaranteed Loan: A mortgage loan
that is guaranteed by the U.S. Depart-
ment of Veterans Affairs (VA).
W
Walk-Through: A common clause in a
sales contract that allows the buyer to
examine the property being purchased
at a specified time immediately before
the closing, for example, within the 24
hours before closing.
Warranties: Written guarantees of the
quality of a product and the promise to
repair or replace defective parts free of
charge.