Annual Percentage Rate (APR): The cost of a loan or other financing as an annual rate. The APR includes the interest rate, points, broker fees and certain other credit charges a borrower is required to pay.
Annuity: An amount paid yearly or at other regular intervals, often at a guaranteed minimum amount. Also, a type of insurance policy in which the policy holder makes payments for a fixed period or until a stated
age, and then receives annuity payments from the insurance company. Application Fee: The fee that a mortgage
lender or broker charges to apply for a mortgage to cover processing costs. Appraisal: A professional analysis used
to estimate the value of the property. This
includes examples of sales of similar prop-
erties.
Appraiser: A professional who conducts an
analysis of the property, including examples
of sales of similar properties in order to de-
velop an estimate of the value of the prop-
erty. The analysis is called an “appraisal.”
Appreciation: An increase in the market
value of a home due to changing market
conditions and/or home improvements.
Arbitration: A process where disputes are
settled by referring them to a fair and neu-
tral third party (arbitrator). The disputing
 Glossary
parties agree in advance to agree with
the decision of the arbitrator. There is
a hearing where both parties have an
opportunity to be heard, after which the
arbitrator makes a decision.
Asbestos: A toxic material that was
once used in housing insulation and
fireproofing. Because some forms of as-
bestos have been linked to certain lung
diseases, it is no longer used in new
homes. However, some older homes may
still have asbestos in these materials.
Assessed Value: Typically the value
placed on property for the purpose of
taxation.
Assessor: A public official who estab-
lishes the value of a property for taxa-
tion purposes.
Asset: Anything of monetary value that
is owned by a person or company. As-
sets include real property, personal
property, stocks, mutual funds, etc.
Assignment of Mortgage: A document
evidencing the transfer of ownership of a
mortgage from one person to another.
Assumable Mortgage: A mortgage loan
that can be taken over (assumed) by the
buyer when a home is sold. An assump-
tion of a mortgage is a transaction in
which the buyer of real property takes
over the seller’s existing mortgage; the
seller remains liable unless released by
the lender from the obligation. If the
mortgage contains a due-on-sale clause,
the loan may not be assumed without
the lender’s consent.
Assumption: A homebuyer’s agreement
to take on the primary responsibility
for paying an existing mortgage from a
home seller.
Assumption Fee: A fee a lender charges
a buyer who will assume the seller’s ex-
isting mortgage.
Automated Underwriting: An auto-
mated process performed by a technol-
ogy application that streamlines the
processing of loan applications and
provides a recommendation to the lender
to approve the loan or refer it for manual
underwriting.
B
Balance Sheet: A financial statement
that shows assets, liabilities, and net
worth as of a specific date.
Balloon Mortgage: A mortgage with
monthly payments often based on a
30-year amortization schedule, with
the unpaid balance due in a lump sum
payment at the end of a specific period
of time (usually 5 or 7 years). The mort-
gage may contain an option to “reset”
the interest rate to the current market
rate and to extend the due date if certain
conditions are met.
Balloon Payment: A final lump sum
payment that is due, often at the matu-
rity date of a balloon mortgage.
Bankruptcy: Legally declared unable to
pay your debts. Bankruptcy can severely
impact your credit and your ability to
borrow money.
Before-tax Income: Income before taxes
are deducted. Also known as “gross in-
come.”
Biweekly Payment Mortgage: A mort-
gage with payments due every two weeks
(instead of monthly).
Bona fide: In good faith, without fraud.
Bridge Loan: A short-term loan secured
by the borrower’s current home (which
is usually for sale) that allows the pro-
ceeds to be used for building or closing
on a new house before the current home
is sold. Also known as a “swing loan.”
Glossary 
Broker: An individual or firm that acts
as an agent between providers and users
of products or services, such as a mort-
gage broker or real estate broker. See
also “Mortgage Broker.”
Building Code: Local regulations that
set forth the standards and require-
ments for the construction, maintenance
and occupancy of buildings. The codes
are designed to provide for the safety,
health and welfare of the public.
Buydown: An arrangement whereby
the property developer or another third
party provides an interest subsidy to
reduce the borrower’s monthly payments
typically in the early years of the loan.
Buydown Account: An account in
which funds are held so that they can be
applied as part of the monthly mortgage
payment as each payment comes due
during the period that an interest rate
buydown plan is in effect.
C
Cap: For an adjustable-rate mortgage
(ARM), a limitation on the amount the
interest rate or mortgage payments may
increase or decrease. See also “Lifetime
Payment Cap,” “Lifetime Rate Cap,” “Pe-
riodic Payment Cap,” and “Periodic Rate
Cap.”
Capacity: Your ability to make your
mortgage payments on time. This de-
pends on your income and income
stability (job history and security), your
assets and savings, and the amount of
your income each month that is left over
after you’ve paid for your housing costs,
debts and other obligations.
Cash-out Refinance: A refinance trans-
action in which the borrower receives
additional funds over and above the
amount needed to repay the existing
mortgage, closing costs, points, and any
subordinate liens.
Certificate of Deposit: A document is-
sued by a bank or other financial institu-
tion that is evidence of a deposit, with the
issuer’s promise to return the deposit plus
earnings at a specified interest rate within
a specified time period.
Certificate of Eligibility: A document is-
sued by the U.S. Department of Veterans
Affairs (VA) certifying a veteran’s eligibility
for a VA-guaranteed mortgage loan.
Chain of Title: The history of all of the
documents that have transferred title to
a parcel of real property, starting with the
earliest existing document and ending
with the most recent.
Change Orders: A change in the original
construction plans ordered by the prop-
erty owner or general contractor.
Clear Title: Ownership that is free of
liens, defects, or other legal encumbranc-
es.
Closing: The process of completing a
financial transaction. For mortgage
loans, the process of signing mortgage
documents, disbursing funds, and, if
applicable, transferring ownership of
the property. In some jurisdictions, clos-
ing is referred to as “escrow,” a process
by which a buyer and seller deliver legal
documents to a third party who completes
the transaction in accordance with their
instructions. See also “Settlement.”
Closing Agent: The person or entity that
coordinates the various closing activities,
including the preparation and recordation
of closing documents and the disburse-
ment of funds. (May be referred to as an
escrow agent or settlement agent in some
jurisdictions.) Typically, the closing is con-
ducted by title companies, escrow compa-
nies or attorneys.
Closing Costs: The upfront fees charged
in connection with a mortgage loan trans-
action. Money paid by a buyer (and/or
seller or other third party, if applicable)
 Glossary
to effect the closing of a mortgage loan,
generally including, but not limited to
a loan origination fee, title examination
and insurance, survey, attorney’s fee,
and prepaid items, such as escrow de-
posits for taxes and insurance.
Closing Date: The date on which the
sale of a property is to be finalized and a
loan transaction completed. Often, a real
estate sales professional coordinates the
setting of this date with the buyer, the
seller, the closing agent, and the lender.
Closing Statement: See “HUD-1 Settle-
ment Statement.”
Co-borrower: Any borrower other than
the first borrower whose name appears
on the application and mortgage note,
even when that person owns the prop-
erty jointly with the first borrower and
shares liability for the note.
Collateral: An asset that is pledged as
security for a loan. The borrower risks
losing the asset if the loan is not repaid
according to the terms of the loan agree-
ment. In the case of a mortgage, the
collateral would be the house and real
property.
Commission: The fee charged for ser-
vices performed, usually based on a
percentage of the price of the items sold
(such as the fee a real estate agent earns
on the sale of a house).
Commitment Letter: A binding of-
fer from your lender that includes the
amount of the mortgage, the interest
rate, and repayment terms.
Common Areas: Those portions of a
building, land, or improvements and
amenities owned by a planned unit
development (PUD) or condominium
project’s homeowners’ association (or
a cooperative project’s cooperative cor-
poration) that are used by all of the
unit owners, who share in the common
expenses of their operation and main-
tenance. Common areas include swim-
ming pools, tennis courts, and other
recreational facilities, as well as common
corridors of buildings, parking areas,
means of ingress and egress, etc.
Comparables: An abbreviation for “com-
parable properties,” which are used as a
comparison in determining the current
value of a property that is being ap-
praised.
Concession: Something given up or
agreed to in negotiating the sale of a
house. For example, the sellers may
agree to help pay for closing costs.
Condominium: A unit in a multiunit
building. The owner of a condominium
unit owns the unit itself and has the
right, along with other owners, to use
the common areas but does not own the
common elements such as the exterior
walls, floors and ceilings or the struc-
tural systems outside of the unit; these
are owned by the condominium associa-
tion. There are usually condominium as-
sociation fees for building maintenance,
property upkeep, taxes and insurance
on the common areas and reserves for
improvements.
Construction Loan: A loan for financ-
ing the cost of construction or improve-
ments to a property; the lender disburs-
es payments to the builder at periodic
intervals during construction.
Contingency: A condition that must be
met before a contract is legally binding.
For example, home purchasers often
include a home inspection contingency;
the sales contract is not binding unless
and until the purchaser has the home
inspected.
Conventional Mortgage: A mortgage
loan that is not insured or guaranteed
by the federal government or one of its
agencies, such as the Federal Housing
Administration (FHA), the U.S. Depart-
ment of Veterans Affairs (VA), or the
Rural Housing Service (RHS). Contrast
with “Government Mortgage.”
Conversion Option: A provision of some
adjustable-rate mortgage (ARM) loans
that allows the borrower to change the
ARM to a fixed-rate mortgage at speci-
fied times after loan origination.
Convertible ARM: An adjustable-rate
mortgage (ARM) that allows the borrower
to convert the loan to a fixed-rate mort-
gage under specified conditions.
Cooperative (Co-op) Project: A project
in which a corporation holds title to a
residential property and sells shares to
individual buyers, who then receive a
proprietary lease as their title.
Cost of Funds Index (COFI): An in-
dex that is used to determine interest
rate changes for certain adjustable-rate
mortgage (ARM) loans. It is based on the
weighted monthly average cost of de-
posits, advances, and other borrowings
of members of the Federal Home Loan
Bank of San Francisco.
Counter-offer: An offer made in re-
sponse to a previous offer. For example,
after the buyer presents their first offer,
the seller may make a counter-offer with
a slightly higher sale price.
Credit: The ability of a person to bor-
row money, or buy goods by paying
over time. Credit is extended based on a
lender’s opinion of the person’s financial
situation and reliability, among other
factors.
Credit Bureau: A company that gath-
ers information on consumers who use
credit. These companies sell that infor-
mation to lenders and other businesses
in the form of a credit report.
Credit History: Information in the files
of a credit bureau, primarily comprised
of a list of individual consumer debts
and a record of whether or not these
debts were paid back on time or “as
Glossary 
agreed.” Your credit history is called a
credit report when provided by a credit
bureau to a lender or other business.
Credit Life Insurance: A type of insur-
ance that pays off a specific amount of
debt or a specified credit account if the
borrower dies while the policy is in force.
Credit Report: Information provided by
a credit bureau that allows a lender or
other business to examine your use of
credit. It provides information on money
that you’ve borrowed from credit institu-
tions and your payment history.
Credit Score: A numerical value that
ranks a borrower’s credit risk at a given
point in time based on a statistical eval-
uation of information in the individual’s
credit history that has been proven to be
predictive of loan performance.
Creditor: A person who extends credit
to whom you owe money.
Creditworthy: Your ability to qualify for
credit and repay debts.
D
Debt: Money owed from one person or
institution to another person or institu-
tion.
Debt-to-Income Ratio: The percent-
age of gross monthly income that goes
toward paying for your monthly hous-
ing expense, alimony, child support, car
payments and other installment debts,
and payments on revolving or open-end-
ed accounts, such as credit cards.
Deed: The legal document transferring
ownership or title to a property
Deed-in-Lieu of Foreclosure: The
transfer of title from a borrower to the
lender to satisfy the mortgage debt and
avoid foreclosure. Also called a “volun-
tary conveyance.”
 Glossary
Deed of Trust: A legal document in
which the borrower transfers the title to
a third party (trustee) to hold as security
for the lender. When the loan is paid in
full, the trustee transfers title back to
the borrower. If the borrower defaults on
the loan the trustee will sell the property
and pay the lender the mortgage debt.
Default: Failure to fulfill a legal obliga-
tion. A default includes failure to pay on
a financial obligation, but also may be a
failure to perform some action or ser-
vice that is non-monetary. For example,
when leasing a car, the lessee is usually
required to properly maintain the car.
Delinquency: Failure to make a pay-
ment when it is due. The condition of a
loan when a scheduled payment has not
been received by the due date, but gen-
erally used to refer to a loan for which
payment is 30 or more days past due.
Depreciation: A decline in the value of
a house due to changing market condi-
tions or lack of upkeep on a home.
Discount Point: A fee paid by the bor-
rower at closing to reduce the interest
rate. A point equals one percent of the
loan amount.
Down Payment: A portion of the price
of a home, usually between 3-20%, not
borrowed and paid up-front in cash.
Some loans are offerend with zero down-
payment.
Due-on-Sale Clause: A provision in a
mortgage that allows the lender to de-
mand repayment in full of the outstand-
ing balance if the property securing the
mortgage is sold.
E
Earnest Money Deposit: The deposit to
show that you’re committed to buying
the home. The deposit usually will not
be refunded to you after the seller ac-
cepts your offer, unless one of the sales
contract contingencies is not fulfilled.
Easement: A right to the use of, or ac-
cess to, land owned by another.
Employer-Assisted Housing: A program
in which companies assist their employ-
ees in purchasing homes by providing
assistance with the down payment, clos-
ing costs, or monthly payments.
Encroachment: The intrusion onto
another’s property without right or per-
mission.
Encumbrance: Any claim on a property,
such as a lien, mortgage or easement.
Equal Credit Opportunity Act (ECOA):
A federal law that requires lenders to
make credit equally available without
regard to the applicant’s race, color, reli-
gion, national origin, age, sex, or marital
status; the fact that all or part of the ap-
plicant’s income is derived from a public
assistance program; or the fact that the
applicant has in good faith exercised any
right under the Consumer Credit Protec-
tion Act. It also requires various notices
to consumers.
Equity: The value in your home above
the total amount of the liens against
your home. If you owe $100,000 on your
house but it is worth $130,000, you
have $30,000 of equity.
Escrow: An item of value, money, or
documents deposited with a third party
to be delivered upon the fulfillment of
a condition. For example, the deposit
by a borrower with the lender of funds
to pay taxes and insurance premiums
when they become due, or the deposit of
funds or documents with an attorney or
escrow agent to be disbursed upon the
closing of a sale of real estate.
Escrow Account: An account that a
mortgage servicer establishes on behalf
of a borrower to pay taxes, insurance
premiums, or other charges when they
are due. Sometimes referred to as an
“impound” or “reserve” account.
Escrow Analysis: The accounting that
a mortgage servicer performs to deter-
mine the appropriate balances for the
escrow account, compute the borrower’s
monthly escrow payments, and deter-
mine whether any shortages, surpluses
or deficiencies exist in the account.
Eviction: The legal act of removing
someone from real property.
Exclusive Right-to-Sell Listing: The
traditional kind of listing agreement un-
der which the property owner appoints
a real estate broker (known as the list-
ing broker) as exclusive agent to sell the
property on the owner’s stated terms,
and agrees to pay the listing broker a
commission when the property is sold,
regardless of whether the buyer is found
by the broker, the owner or another
broker. This is the kind of listing agree-
ment that is commonly used by a list-
ing broker to provide the traditional full
range of real estate brokerage services.
If a second real estate broker (known as
a selling broker) finds the buyer for the
property, then some commission will be
paid to the selling broker.
Exclusive Agency Listing: A listing
agreement under which a real estate
broker (known as the listing broker) acts
as an exclusive agent to sell the prop-
erty for the property owner, but may be
paid a reduced or no commission when
the property is sold if, for example, the
property owner rather than the listing
broker finds the buyer. This kind of list-
ing agreement can be used to provide
the owner a limited range of real estate
brokerage services rather than the tra-
ditional full range. As with other kinds
of listing agreements, if a second real
estate broker (known as a selling broker)
finds the buyer for the property, then
some commission will be paid to the
selling broker.
Glossary 
Executor: A person named in a will and
approved by a probate court to adminis-
ter the deposition of an estate in accor-
dance with the instructions of the will.
F
Fair Credit Reporting Act (FCRA): A
consumer protection law that imposes
obligations on (1) credit bureaus (and
similar agencies) that maintain consum-
er credit histories, (2) lenders and other
businesses that buy reports from credit
bureaus, and (3) parties who furnish
consumer information to credit bureaus.
Among other provisions, the FCRA limits
the sale of credit reports by credit bu-
reaus by requiring the purchaser to have
a legitimate business need for the data,
allows consumers to learn the informa-
tion on them in credit bureau files (in-
cluding one annual free credit report),
and specifies procedure for challenging
errors in that data.
Fair Market Value: The price at which
property would be transferred between
a willing buyer and willing seller, each
of whom has a reasonable knowledge of
all pertinent facts and is not under any
compulsion to buy or sell.
Fannie Mae: A New York stock ex-
change company. It is a public company
that operates under a federal charter
and is the nation’s largest source of
financing for home mortgages. Fannie
Mae does not lend money directly to
consumers, but instead works to en-
sure that mortgage funds are available
and affordable, by purchasing mortgage
loans from institutions that lend directly
to consumers.
Fannie Mae-Seller/Servicer: A lender
that Fannie Mae has approved to sell
loans to it and to service loans on Fan-
nie Mae’s behalf.
Fannie Mae/Freddie Mac Loan Limit:
The current 2006 Fannie Mae/Freddie
 Glossary
Mac loan limit for a single-family home
is $417,000 and is higher in Alaska,
Guam, Hawaii, and the U.S. Virgin
Islands. The Fannie Mae loan limit is
$533,850 for a two-unit home; $645,300
for a three-unit home; and $801,950 for
a four-unit home. Also referred to as the
“conventional loan limit.”
Federal Housing Administration
(FHA): An agency within the U.S. De-
partment of Housing and Urban Devel-
opment (HUD) that insures mortgages
and loans made by private lenders.
FHA-Insured Loan: A loan that is in-
sured by the Federal Housing Adminis-
tration (FHA) of the U.S. Department of
Housing and Urban Development (HUD).
First Mortgage: A mortgage that is the
primary lien against a property.
First-Time Home Buyer: A person with
no ownership interest in a principal
residence during the three-year period
preceding the purchase of the security
property.
Fixed-Period Adjustable-Rate Mort-
gage: An adjustable-rate mortgage (ARM)
that offers a fixed rate for an initial
period, typically three to ten years, and
then adjusts every six months, annually,
or at another specified period, for the
remainder of the term. Also known as a
“hybrid loan.”
Fixed-Rate Mortgage: A mortgage with
an interest rate that does not change
during the entire term of the loan.
Flood Certification Fee: A fee charged
by independent mapping firms to identi-
fy properties located in areas designated
as flood zones.
Flood Insurance: Insurance that com-
pensates for physical property damage
resulting from flooding. It is required for
properties located in federally designated
flood hazard zones.
Foreclosure: A legal action that ends
all ownership rights in a home when the
homebuyer fails to make the mortgage
payments or is otherwise in default un-
der the terms of the mortgage.
Forfeiture: The loss of money, property,
rights, or privileges due to a breach of a
legal obligation.
Fully Amortized Mortgage: A mortgage
in which the monthly payments are de-
signed to retire the obligation at the end
of the mortgage term.