General Contractor: A person who
oversees a home improvement or con-
struction project and handles various
aspects such as scheduling workers and
ordering supplies.
Gift Letter: A letter that a family mem-
ber writes verifying that s/he has given
you a certain amount of money as a gift
and that you don’t have to repay it. You
can use this money towards a portion
of your down payment with some mort-
gages.
Good-Faith Estimate: A form required
by the Real Estate Settlement Proce-
dures Act (RESPA) that discloses an esti-
mate of the amount or range of charges,
for specific settlement services the bor-
rower is likely to incur in connection
with the mortgage transaction.
Government Mortgage: A mortgage
loan that is insured or guaranteed by a
federal government entity such as the
Federal Housing Administration (FHA),
the U.S. Department of Veterans
Affairs (VA), or the Rural Housing
Service (RHS).
Government National Mortgage
Association (Ginnie Mae): A govern-
ment-owned corporation within the U.S.
Department of Housing and Urban De-
Glossary 
velopment (HUD) that guarantees se-
curities backed by mortgages that are
insured or guaranteed by other gov-
ernment agencies. Popularly known as
“Ginnie Mae.”
Gross Monthly Income: The income
you earn in a month before taxes and
other deductions. It also may include
rental income, self-employed income,
income from alimony, child support,
public assistance payments, and re-
tirement benefits.
Ground Rent: Payment for the use of
land when title to a property is held as
a leasehold estate (that is, the borrow-
er does not actually own the property,
but has a long-term lease on it).
Growing-Equity Mortgage (GEM):
A fixed-rate mortgage in which the
monthly payments increase according
to an agreed-upon schedule, with the
extra funds applied to reduce the loan
balance and loan term.
H
Hazard Insurance: Insurance cover-
age that compensates for physical
damage to a property from fire, wind,
vandalism, or other covered hazards
or natural disasters.
Home Equity Conversion Mortgage
(HECM): A special type of mortgage
developed and insured by the Federal
Housing Administration (FHA) that
enables older home owners to convert
the equity they have in their homes
into cash, using a variety of payment
options to address their specific finan-
cial needs. Sometimes called a “re-
verse mortgage.”
Home Equity Line of Credit
(HELOC): A type of revolving loan,
that enables a home owner to obtain
multiple advances of the loan pro-
ceeds at his or her own discretion, up
to an amount that represents a specified
percentage of the borrower’s equity in
the property.
Home Inspection: A professional in-
spection of a home to determine the
condition of the property. The inspec-
tion should include an evaluation of the
plumbing, heating and cooling systems,
roof, wiring, foundation and pest infesta-
tion.
Homeowner’s Insurance: A policy that
protects you and the lender from fire or
flood, which damages the structure of
the house; a liability, such as an injury
to a visitor to your home; or damage to
your personal property, such as your
furniture, clothes or appliances
Homeowner’s Warranty (HOW): In-
surance offered by a seller that covers
certain home repairs and fixtures for a
specified period of time.
Homeowners’ Association: An organi-
zation of homeowners residing within a
particular area whose principal purpose
is to ensure the provision and main-
tenance of community facilities and
services for the common benefit of the
residents.
Housing Expense Ratio: The percent-
age of your gross monthly income that
goes toward paying for your housing
expenses.
HUD-1 Settlement Statement: A final
listing of the closing costs of the mort-
gage transaction. It provides the sales
price and down payment, as well as the
total settlement costs required from the
buyer and seller.
Hybrid Loan: An adjustable-rate mort-
gage (ARM) that offers a fixed rate for
an initial period, typically three to
ten years, and then adjusts every six
months, annually, or at another speci-
fied period, for the remainder of the
term.
10 Glossary
I
Income Property: Real estate developed
or purchased to produce income, such
as a rental unit.
Index: A number used to compute
the interest rate for an adjustable-rate
mortgage (ARM). The index is generally
a published number or percentage, such
as the average interest rate or yield on
U.S. Treasury bills. A margin is added to
the index to determine the interest rate
that will be charged on the ARM. This
interest rate is subject to any caps on
the maximum or minimum interest rate
that may be charged on the mortgage,
stated in the note.
Individual Retirement Account (IRA):
A tax-deferred plan that can help you
build a retirement nest egg.
Inflation: An increase in prices.
Initial Interest Rate: The original inter-
est rate for an adjustable-rate mortgage
(ARM). Sometimes known as the “start
rate.”
Inquiry: A request for a copy of your
credit report by a lender or other busi-
ness, often when you fill out a credit
application and/or request more credit.
Too many inquiries on a credit report
can hurt your credit score; however,
most credit scores are not affected by
multiple inquiries from auto or mortgage
lenders within a short period of time.
Installment: The regular periodic pay-
ment that a borrower agrees to make to
a lender.
Installment Debt: A loan that is repaid
in accordance with a schedule of pay-
ments for a specified term (such as an
automobile loan).
Interest: The cost you pay to borrow money. It is the payment you make to a lender for the money it has loaned to you. Interest is usually expressed as a
percentage of the amount borrowed.
Interest Accrual Rate: The percentage
rate at which interest accumulates or
increases on a mortgage loan.
Interest Rate Cap: For an adjustable-
rate mortgage (ARM), a limitation on the
amount the interest rate can change per
adjustment or over the lifetime of the
loan, as stated in the note.
Interest Rate Ceiling: For an adjust-
able-rate mortgage (ARM), the maximum
interest rate, as specified in the mort-
gage note.
Interest Rate Floor: For an adjustable-
rate mortgage (ARM), the minimum in-
terest rate, as specified in the mortgage
note.
Investment Property: A property pur-
chased to generate rental income, tax
benefits, or profitable resale rather than
to serve as the borrower’s primary resi-
dence. Contrast with “second home.”
J
Judgment Lien: A lien on the property
of a debtor resulting from the decree of a
court.
Jumbo Loan: A loan that exceeds the
mortgage amount eligible for purchase
by Fannie Mae or Freddie Mac. Also
called “non-conforming loan.”
Junior Mortgage: A loan that is subor-
dinate to the primary loan or first-lien
mortgage loan, such as a second or third
mortgage.
K
Keogh Funds: A tax-deferred retire-
ment-savings plan for small business
owners or self-employed individuals who
Glossary 11
have earned income from their trade or
business. Contributions to the Keogh
plan are tax-deductible.
L
Late Charge: A penalty imposed by the
lender when a borrower fails to make a
scheduled payment on time.
Lease-Purchase Option: An option
sometimes used by sellers to rent a
property to a consumer, who has the op-
tion to buy the home within a specified
period of time. Typically, part of each
rental payment is put aside for the pur-
pose of accumulating funds to pay the
down payment and closing costs.
Liabilities: A person’s debts and other
financial obligations.
Liability Insurance: Insurance coverage
that protects property owners against
claims of negligence, personal injury or
property damage to another party.
LIBOR-Index: An index used to deter-
mine interest rate changes for certain
adjustable-rate mortgage (ARM) plans,
based on the average interest rate at
which international banks lend to or
borrow funds from the London Inter-
bank Market.
Lien: A claim or charge on property for
payment of a debt. With a mortgage,
the lender has the right to take the title
to your property if you don’t make the
mortgage payments.
Lifetime Cap: For an adjustable-rate
mortgage (ARM), a limit on the amount
that the interest rate or monthly pay-
ment can increase or decrease over the
life of the loan.
Liquid Asset: A cash asset or an asset
that is easily converted into cash.
Loan Origination: The process by which
a loan is made, which may include tak-
ing a loan application, processing and
underwriting the application, and clos-
ing the loan.
Loan Origination Fees: Fees paid to
your mortgage lender or broker for pro-
cessing the mortgage application. This
fee is usually in the form of points. One
point equals one percent of the mortgage
amount.
Loan-To-Value (LTV) Ratio: The re-
lationship between the loan amount
and the value of the property (the lower
of appraised value or sales price), ex-
pressed as a percentage of the property’s
value. For example, a $100,000 home
with an $80,000 mortgage has an LTV of
80 percent.
Lock-In Rate: A written agreement
guaranteeing a specific mortgage inter-
est rate for a certain amount of time.
Low-Down-Payment Feature: A feature
of some mortgages, usually fixed-rate
mortgages, that helps you buy a home
with a low down payment.
M
Manufactured Housing: Homes that
are built entirely in a factory in accor-
dance with a federal building code ad-
ministered by the U.S. Department of
Housing and Urban Development (HUD).
Manufactured homes may be single-
or multi-section and are transported
from the factory to a site and installed.
Homes that are permanently affixed to
a foundation often may be classified as
real property under applicable state law,
and may be financed with a mortgage.
Homes that are not permanently affixed
to a foundation generally are classified
as personal property, and are financed
with a retail installment sales agree-
ment.
1 Glossary
Margin: A percentage added to the index
for an adjustable-rate mortgage (ARM) to
establish the interest rate on each ad-
justment date.
Market Value: The current value of your
home based on what a purchaser would
pay. An appraisal is sometimes used to
determine market value.
Maturity Date: The date on which a
mortgage loan is scheduled to be paid in
full, as stated in the note.
Merged Credit Report: A credit report
issued by a credit reporting company
that combines information from two or
three major credit bureaus.
Modification: Any change to the terms
of a mortgage loan, including changes to
the interest rate, loan balance, or loan
term.
Money Market Account: A type of in-
vestment in which funds are invested in
short-term securities.
Mortgage: A loan using your home as
collateral. In some states the term mort-
gage is also used to describe the docu-
ment you sign (to grant the lender a lien
on your home). It also may be used to
indicate the amount of money you bor-
row, with interest, to purchase your
house. The amount of your mortgage
often is the purchase price of the home
minus your down payment.
Mortgage Broker: An individual or firm
that brings borrowers and lenders to-
gether for the purpose of loan origina-
tion. A mortgage broker typically takes
loan applications and may process
loans. A mortgage broker also may close
the loan.
Mortgage Insurance (MI): Insurance
that protects lenders against losses
caused by a borrower’s default on a
mortgage loan. MI typically is required
if the borrower’s down payment is less
than 20 percent of the purchase price.
Mortgage Insurance Premium (MIP):
The amount paid by a borrower for
mortgage insurance, either to a govern-
ment agency such as the Federal Hous-
ing Administration (FHA) or to a private
mortgage insurance (PMI) company.
Mortgage Lender: The lender providing
funds for a mortgage. Lenders also man-
age the credit and financial information
review, the property and the loan appli-
cation process through closing.
Mortgage Life Insurance: A type of
insurance that will pay off a mortgage if
the borrower dies while the loan is out-
standing; a form of credit life insurance.
Mortgage Rate: The interest rate you
pay to borrow the money to buy your
house.
Mortgagee: The institution or individual
to whom a mortgage is given.
Mortgagor: The owner of real estate who
pledges property as security for the re-
payment of a debt; the borrower.
Multifamily Mortgage: A mortgage loan
on a building with five or more dwelling
units.
Multifamily Properties: Typically,
buildings with five or more dwelling
units.
Multiple Listing Service (MLS): A
clearinghouse through which member
real estate brokerage firms regularly and
systematically exchange information
on listings of real estate properties and
share commissions with members who
locate purchasers. The MLS for an area
is usually operated by the local, private
real estate association as a joint venture
among its members designed to foster
real estate brokerage services.
Mutual Funds: A fund that pools the
money of its investors to buy a variety of
securities.
N
Negative Amortization: An increase in
the balance of a loan caused by adding
unpaid interest to the loan balance; this
occurs when the payment does not cover
the interest due.
Net Monthly Income: Your take-home
pay after taxes. It is the amount of
money that you actually receive in your
paycheck.
Net Worth: The value of a company or
individual’s assets, including cash, less
total liabilities.
Non-Liquid Asset: An asset that cannot
easily be converted into cash.
Note: A written promise to pay a speci-
fied amount under the agreed upon
conditions.
Note Rate: The interest rate stated on a
mortgage note, or other loan agreement.
O
Offer: A formal bid from the home buyer
to the home seller to purchase a home.
Open House: When the seller’s real
estate agent opens the seller’s house to
the public. You don’t need a real estate
agent to attend an open house.
Original Principal Balance: The total
amount of principal owed on a mortgage
before any payments are made.
Origination Fee: A fee paid to a lender
or broker to cover the administrative
costs of processing a loan application.
The origination fee typically is stated in
the form of points. One point is one per-
cent of the mortgage amount.
Owner Financing: A transaction in
which the property seller provides all or
Glossary 1
part of the financing for the buyer’s pur-
chase of the property.
Owner-Occupied Property: A property
that serves as the borrower’s primary
residence.
P
Partial Payment: A payment that is less
than the scheduled monthly payment on
a mortgage loan.
Payment Change Date: The date on
which a new monthly payment amount
takes effect, for example, on an adjust-
able-rate mortgage (ARM) loan.
Payment Cap: For an adjustable-rate
mortgage (ARM) or other variable rate
loan, a limit on the amount that pay-
ments can increase or decrease during
any one adjustment period.
Personal Property: Any property that is
not real property.
PITI: An acronym for the four primary
components of a monthly mortgage
payment: principle, interest, taxes, and
insurance (PITI).
PITI Reserves: A cash amount that a
borrower has available after making a
down payment and paying closing costs
for the purchase of a home. The princi-
pal, interest, taxes, and insurance (PITI)
reserves must equal the amount that the
borrower would have to pay for PITI for a
predefined number of months.
Planned Unit Development (PUD): A
real estate project in which individuals
hold title to a residential lot and home
while the common facilities are owned
and maintained by a homeowners’ as-
sociation for the benefit and use of the
individual PUD unit owners.
Point: One percent of the amount of the
mortgage loan. For example, if a loan
1 Glossary
is made for $50,000, one point equals
$500.
Power of Attorney: A legal document
that authorizes another person to act
on one’s behalf. A power of attorney can
grant complete authority or can be lim-
ited to certain acts and/or certain peri-
ods of time.
Pre-Approval: A process by which a
lender provides a prospective borrower
with an indication of how much money
he or she will be eligible to borrow when
applying for a mortgage loan. This pro-
cess typically includes a review of the
applicant’s credit history and may in-
volve the review and verification of in-
come and assets to close.
Pre-Approval Letter: A letter from a
mortgage lender indicating that you
qualify for a mortgage of a specific
amount. It also shows a home seller that
you’re a serious buyer.
Pre-Qualification: A preliminary assess-
ment by a lender of the amount it will
lend to a potential home buyer. The pro-
cess of determining how much money a
prospective home buyer may be eligible
to borrow before he or she applies for a
loan.
Pre-Qualification Letter: A letter from
a mortgage lender that states that you’re
pre-qualified to buy a home, but does
not commit the lender to a particular
mortgage amount.
Predatory Lending: Abusive lending
practices that include making mort-
gage loans to people who do not have
the income to repay them or repeatedly
refinancing loans, charging high points
and fees each time and “packing” credit
insurance onto a loan.
Prepayment: Any amount paid to re-
duce the principal balance of a loan
before the scheduled due date.
Prepayment Penalty: A fee that a bor-
rower may be required to pay to the
lender, in the early years of a mortgage
loan, for repaying the loan in full or pre-
paying a substantial amount to reduce
the unpaid principle balance.
Principal: The amount of money bor-
rowed or the amount of the loan that
has not yet been repaid to the lender.
This does not include the interest you
will pay to borrow that money. The
principal balance (sometimes called the
outstanding or unpaid principal balance)
is the amount owed on the loan minus
the amount you’ve repaid.
Private Mortgage Insurance: Insur-
ance for conventional mortgage loans
that protects the lender from loss in the
event of default by the borrower. See
Mortgage Insurance
Promissory Note: A written promise to
repay a specified amount over a speci-
fied period of time.
Property Appreciation: See “Apprecia-
tion.”
Purchase and Sale Agreement: A docu-
ment that details the price and condi-
tions for a transaction. In connection
with the sale of a residential property,
the agreement typically would include:
information about the property to be
sold, sale price, down payment, earnest
money deposit, financing, closing date,
occupancy date, length of time the offer
is valid, and any special contingencies.
Purchase Money Mortgage: A mortgage
loan that enables a borrower to acquire
a property.
Q
Qualifying Guidelines: Criteria used to
determine eligibility for a loan.
Glossary 1
Qualifying Ratios: Calculations that are
used in determining the loan amount
that a borrower qualifies for, typically
a comparison of the borrower’s total
monthly income to monthly debt pay-
ments and other recurring monthly
obligations.
Quality Control: A system of safeguards
to ensure that loans are originated, un-
derwritten and serviced according to the
lender’s standards and, if applicable, the
standards of the investor, governmental
agency, or mortgage insurer.
R
Radon: A toxic gas found in the soil
beneath a house that can contribute to
cancer and other illnesses.
Rate Cap: The limit on the amount an
interest rate on an adjustable-rate mort-
gage (ARM) can increase or decrease
during an adjustment period.
Rate Lock: An agreement in which an
interest rate is “locked in” or guaranteed
for a specified period of time prior to
closing. See also “Lock-in Rate.”
Ratified Sales Contract: A contract
that shows both you and the seller of
the house have agreed to your offer. This
offer may include sales contingencies,
such as obtaining a mortgage of a cer-
tain type and rate, getting an acceptable
inspection, making repairs, closing by a
certain date, etc.
Real Estate Professional: An individual
who provides services in buying and
selling homes. The real estate profes-
sional is paid a percentage of the home
sale price by the seller. Unless you’ve
specifically contracted with a buyer’s
agent, the real estate professional rep-
resents the interest of the seller. Real
estate professionals may be able to refer
you to local lenders or mortgage brokers,
but are generally not involved in the
lending process.
Real Estate Settlement Procedures
Act (RESPA): A federal law that requires
lenders to provide home mortgage bor-
rowers with information about transac-
tion-related costs prior to settlement, as
well as information during the life of the
loan regarding servicing and escrow ac-
counts. RESPA also prohibits kickbacks
and unearned fees in the mortgage loan
business.
Real Property: Land and anything
permanently affixed thereto — including
buildings, fences, trees, and minerals.
Recorder: The public official who keeps
records of transactions that affect real
property in the area. Sometimes known
as a “Registrar of Deeds” or “County
Clerk.”
Recording: The filing of a lien or other
legal documents in the appropriate pub-
lic record.
Refinance: Getting a new mortgage with
all or some portion of the proceeds used
to pay off the prior mortgage.
Rehabilitation Mortgage: A mortgage
loan made to cover the costs of repair-
ing, improving, and sometimes acquiring
an existing property.
Remaining Term: The original number
of payments due on the loan minus the
number of payments that have been
made.
Repayment Plan: An arrangement by
which a borrower agrees to make ad-
ditional payments to pay down past due
amounts while still making regularly
scheduled payments.
Replacement Cost: The cost to replace
damaged personal property without a
deduction for depreciation.
1 Glossary
Rescission: The cancellation or annul-
ment of a transaction or contract by
operation of law or by mutual consent.
Borrowers have a right to cancel certain
mortgage refinance and home equity
transactions within three business days
after closing, or for up to three years in
certain instances.
Revolving Debt: Credit that is extended
by a creditor under a plan in which
(1) the creditor contemplates repeated
transactions; (2) the creditor may im-
pose a finance charge from time to time
on an outstanding unpaid balance; and
(3) the amount of credit that may be ex-
tended to the consumer during the term
of the plan is generally made available to
the extent that any outstanding balance
is repaid.
Right of First Refusal: A provision in
an agreement that requires the owner
of a property to give another party the
first opportunity to purchase or lease
the property before he or she offers it for
sale or lease to others.
Rural Housing Service (RHS): An
agency within the U.S. Department of
Agriculture (USDA), which operates a
range of programs to help rural commu-
nities and individuals by providing loan
and grants for housing and community
facilities. The agency also works with
private lenders to guarantee loans for
the purchase or construction of single-
family housing.
S
Securities: A financial form that shows
the holder owns a share or shares of a
company (stock) or has loaned money to
a company or government organization
(bond).
Sale-Leaseback: A transaction in which
the buyer leases the property back to
the seller for a specified period of time.
Second Mortgage: A mortgage that has
a lien position subordinate to the first
mortgage.
Secondary Mortgage Market: The mar-
ket in which mortgage loan and mort-
gage-backed securities are bought and
sold.
Secured Loan: A loan that is backed by
property such as a house, car, jewelry,
etc.
Security: The property that will be given
or pledged as collateral for a loan.
Securities: Financial forms that shows
the holder owns a share or shares of a
company (stocks) or has loaned money
to a company or government organiza-
tion (bonds).
Seller Take-Back: An agreement in
which the seller of a property provides
financing to the buyer for the home pur-
chase. See also “Owner Financing.”
Servicer: A firm that performs servicing
functions, including collecting mortgage
payments, paying the borrower’s taxes
and insurance and generally managing
borrower escrow accounts.
Servicing: The tasks a lender performs
to protect the mortgage investment,
including the collection of mortgage
payments, escrow administration, and
delinquency management.
Settlement: The process of complet-
ing a loan transaction at which time the
mortgage documents are signed and
then recorded, funds are disbursed, and
the property is transferred to the buyer
(if applicable). Also called closing or es-
crow in different jurisdictions. See also
“Closing”
Settlement Statement: A document
that lists all closing costs on a consumer
mortgage transaction.
Single-Family Properties: One- to
four-unit properties including detached
homes, townhouses, condominiums, and
cooperatives, and manufactured homes
attached to a permanent foundation and
classified as real property under appli-
cable state law.
Soft Second Loan: A second mortgage
whose payment is forgiven or is deferred
until resale of the property.
Servicemembers Civil Relief Act: A
federal law that restricts the enforce-
ment of civilian debts against certain
military personnel who may not be able
to pay because of active military service.
It also provides other protections to cer-
tain military personel.
Subordinate Financing: Any mortgage
or other lien with lower priority than the
first mortgage.
Survey: A precise measurement of a
property by a licensed surveyor, show-
ing legal boundaries of a property and
the dimensions and location of improve-
ments.
Sweat Equity: A borrower’s contribution
to the down payment for the purchase of
a property in the form of labor or ser-
vices rather than cash.
T
Taxes and Insurance: Funds collected
as part of the borrower’s monthly pay-
ment and held in escrow for the pay-
ment of the borrower’s, or funds paid by
the borrower for, state and local prop-
erty taxes and insurance premiums.
Termite Inspection: An inspection to
determine whether a property has ter-
mite infestation or termite damage. In
many parts of the country, a home must
be inspected for termites before it can be
sold.
Glossary 1
Third-Party Origination: A process by
which a lender uses another party to
completely or partially originate, pro-
cess, underwrite, close, fund, or pack-
age a mortgage loan. See also “Mortgage
Broker.”
Title: The right to, and the ownership
of, property. A title or deed is sometimes
used as proof of ownership of land.
Title Insurance: Insurance that pro-
tects lenders and homeowners against
legal problems with the title.
Title Search: A check of the public re-
cords to ensure that the seller is the le-
gal owner of the property and to identify
any liens or claims against the property.
Trade Equity: Real estate or assets
given to the seller as part of the down
payment for the property.
Transfer Tax: State or local tax payable
when title to property passes from one
owner to another.
Treasury Index: An index that is used
to determine interest rate changes for
certain adjustable-rate mortgage (ARM)
plans. It is based on the results of auc-
tions by the U.S. Treasury of Treasury
bills and securities.
Truth-In-Lending Act (TILA): A fed-
eral law that requires disclosure of a
truth-in-lending statement for consumer
credit. The statement includes a sum-
mary of the total cost of credit, such as
the annual percentage rate (APR) and
other specifics of the credit.
Two- to Four- Family Property: A
residential property that provides liv-
ing space (dwelling units) for two to
four families, although ownership of the
structure is evidenced by a single deed;
a loan secured by such a property is
considered to be a single-family mort-
gage.